all right everybody this is Chris so
today I'm speaking with David Deutsch
David is a visiting professor of physics
at the center for Quantum computation at
Oxford University and also an honorary
fellow of Wolfson College
he works on fundamental issues in
physics particularly the quantum theory
of computation and information as well
as Constructor Theory he has also
written two fantastic books aimed at the
general reader the fabric of reality and
the beginning of infinity
you can find out more about David at his
personal website David
deutsch.org.uk or you can go and find
him on Twitter at David Deutsch Ox
that's oxf now as you'll see by the end
of the podcast David talks about how it
was to meet his own intellectual hero
Carl popper and as many of you already
know my intellectual hero whose work is
the basis and the inspiration for this
podcast is David himself so it was a
great honor and a great joy for me to
speak with him and I proudly present our
conversation so hold on to your hat we
were to pay and let's go
[Music]
all right so I'm here with David Deutsch
David welcome to do explain
hi there
when I visited you in Oxford a few
months back I brought you some Swedish
chocolate bars some dame bars and I was
wondering if you've noticed any
increases in creativity by eating them
perhaps
I can't remember which ones they were
because there were also some Dutch ones
oh yes not now I remember the Swedish
ones were delicious
I'm very the Dutch ones were different
in kind they were um they were supposed
to be put on something like on pancakes
and there they were delicious too right
right well many people don't know this
but similar to how Coca-Cola supposedly
had cocaine in their early product the
dam bars are completely laced with LSD
so I was hoping that that could spark
some interesting conjectures for you
there when you're writing why should
that produce any different state from my
normal State yeah
exactly I would actually be interested
to have you uh do a study with that I've
always wondered how your mind works yeah
I'd rather not risk it yeah I'll leave
that to others
I think that might be wise so yeah I
thought we could start by revisiting our
prehistoric and pre-scientific pasts
which are times that people seem to look
back on with very different sentiments
many
um many paint is somewhat romantic view
where people were exempt from Modern
stressors such as long days at the
office and the increasing horrors of
social media and we're instead free to
forage and Hunt spend a large chunk of
their days enjoying themselves in in
tribal societies resting playing singing
together and so on it was a much simpler
time or so they say so I I take you to
be in the opposite Camp here advocating
a much more Grim description of the
history of humanity so I like you to
just explain why you think it's a
mistake to look back on history with
Envy well for prehistory
we don't have obviously any records and
we hardly have any paleontological
evidence either
but just the
gross facts that we know make this
picture of an idyllic uh prehistoric
past really untenable
so one gross fact is that our species
has existed in its current form
for at least a hundred thousand years
maybe two or three times that according
to some people
so in that hundred thousand years in
this idyllic life
the human population didn't ever grow
very much
whereas today
it does and we have a population of
billions now what kept the population
down and what kept the population
constant in those days for most of our
history that's one thing and I think the
answer is nothing good yeah and I think
that uh whatever that was whether it was
famine disease War
getting a bite from an insect which you
then had a horrible death from
whatever that was people would have been
frightened of it
they would have not wanted this to
happen and yet it did
right so that's one thing another thing
we know just from the little
paleontological evidence that we have
is that nothing changed much
so when paleontologists dig up some
fossils and they dig up the stone tools
or or
remains of campfires and whatever that
that they find they can't date them
typically to an accuracy if better than
like a thousand years or even more
so that means that
technology
which is
these people's way of avoiding
famine and Predator attacks and what
have you
those means of
escaping from their fears a little
didn't improve
for thousands of years at a time
and again today we're used to our
lifestyle being revolutionized within a
lifetime
and I I think these things are all
connected and the reason that uh no
progress was made is connected of course
with the reason why life was horrible
and these bits of evidence I think can't
be explained
on the basis that they were living the
lives they wanted to
they were like living lives of
desperation and fear by the way
the very capacity for for fear and pain
and and so on
must have evolved
and did not unevolve during this hundred
thousand years when we were allegedly
living an idyllic life it had a use the
people that did not have those feelings
preferentially died compared with people
that had those feelings a bit more and
the the level that we have them at is
genetically determined or at least the
genetically determined level that we
have them at is is genetically uh
determined and is roughly speaking
Optimum for replication
so anything horrible that we experience
in our bodies was put there by Evolution
and therefore
we can conclude that our ancestors felt
those things a lot
right
that yeah that's a very interesting take
on it I never thought of it in those
terms but I'm curious if you have
if you're aware of the book tribe by
Sebastian younger
no I'm not no okay so he he argues in
that book that humans have evolved to
live in smaller close-knit tribal
communities where survival depended on
working together and hence putting the
group first because without the group
you couldn't survive and this brought
with it or at least so he argues a
strong sense of community a strong sense
of belonging where the individual felt
needed and his life was imbued with a
powerful meaning as a result and so this
tight bond between people which I I hear
can be replicated in modern times
through for instance military operations
where the individual once again has to
rely on the group to fight for a common
goal of survival but he says that this
is lacking in Western society today
where there's no
direct common threat to our lives in the
same way and this is how he wants to
explain much of our modern suffering
like high levels of depression suicides
anxiety disorders and I'm not sure I
agree with the idea that we need this
hardship to feel a tight bond with other
people however I I do think he has a
point when it comes to
lack of social cohesion and maybe a
sense of meaning in many people's lives
today so is there something to be said
for
I mean in regard to what you just said
there do you think there can be
something to be said for people being as
happy or even happier in earlier times
because they have this much stronger
sense of togetherness or of being needed
than we have today yes it's interesting
that that when people try to sort of put
down humans and denigrate our alleged
desire to think of ourselves as good and
great
and despite the fact that
this denigration is extremely popular
and and seems to be taken up in in all
versions so there's there's the idea
that we are inherently tribal
which is used to explain racism and
violence and and the lack of it is used
to explain
um as you as you just said is used to
explain uh anxiety and and social
dislocation and so on
and I don't believe any of that uh I I
think this is just
sheer argument by analogy with a a fixed
conclusion
that people are bad people are
mechanical people are explained by
prehistory
I don't think so I I although it may
well be true and I just said earlier
that summer at least of our range of
feelings
and states of mind
are evolved
but what
external
conditions we attach to those that we
attach those feelings to is very much
determined by culture
and by individual choice and individual
creativity uh you know it's some people
uh say that that we're bad because we're
tribal other people say we're bad
because we're selfish
okay uh can you have that both ways and
that now now you're telling me the
people who are saying we're good because
we're tribal and I know that that there
are groups of of uh philosophers who say
that we're good because we're selfish so
there you have all four possibilities
and all of them
ignore the most important thing about
humans which is uh creative thought
which can and does
allow us to transcend our genetic
programming
so you do have people who are tribal and
you do have cultures that are tribal but
you do have also people who are
individualistic and cultures that are
individualistic and so on you you it
takes all sorts to make the human world
where it does not take all sorts to make
let's say the lion World lions in that
respect
are explainable by their genes
whereas humans are explainable by their
ideas
yeah this seems to be uh hand in hand
with the idea of human nature and I just
like you say there I I hear this concept
being invoked often to excuse certain
behaviors and observe Tendencies among
humans historically and to argue that
some things just can't be changed
selfishness and violence comes to mind
uh for me as well I hear them quite
frequently in arguments but
okay so so this idea that parts of our
psychology are just inescapable that is
trumped by creative thought yes
and even uh not just inescapable some
ideologies say okay we can escape it but
we have to try really hard we have to
discipline ourselves or discipline each
other or discipline children to override
this almost
insuperable bad tendency whatever you
know people think it happens to be and
as I as I keep saying the fact that
people bring up opposite alleged
Tendencies and make a similar argument
um from them is is in itself a sign that
this is a bad explanation through and
through
um but so if if we go back to younger's
claim there about the strong need to
feel needed or to you hear people say
we're a social animal we're inescapably
Social Animal I suppose you would argue
the same way there but
if you think we suffer from the
so-called lack of meaning today and that
that they could have had better social
relationships that would contribute to
happiness for a person well I I think we
our aspirations have definitely improved
you know I I spoke about all the things
that our ancestors feared
and the fear of those
in some sense is is still there but much
much less and doesn't dominate our lives
hmm
so I I think the things like alienation
I think Marx invented the term in this
context uh and and the theories that
you're mentioned you mentioned they are
just theories and people can adopt a
theory
and then condition their feelings
consciously or unconsciously
by that theory so for example if you
have a theory that you belong to a group
that's persecuted then you you you you
may find yourself falling into a victim
mentality
which means that you are interpreting
yourself according to the theory which
is the opposite is the very opposite of
being driven by your genes
uh this is though what we really do we
interpret ourselves according to
theories and attitudes and they come
from maybe some of them come from our
genes but that doesn't make them
immutable
but certainly many of them come from
culture because we know that uh some
attitudes are recent and did not exist
even a few centuries ago
and some
come from our own creativity
so that a person
uh like I don't know what was that
ancient Greek philosopher who lived in a
barrel uh was it diodes or something I
have to admit ignorance yeah uh yeah me
too there was some guy yeah there was
some guy who lived in a barrel and he
had
come up with the idea that this was the
good life
and maybe he was
depriving himself of things in a rather
masochistic way like people sometimes do
now as well they they you know no pain
no gain and and uh various ways of life
that are based on
self
deprivation or maybe he was trying
creatively
to for example
rid himself of interference from other
people
or rid himself of the obligations
that interactions with other people
would bring or maybe he will he enjoyed
being this eccentric guy that people
would come and and kneel before his
barrel and ask for his wise advice and
maybe that wouldn't have happened if
he'd lived in a house who knows but none
of those things were in his genes and if
you try to say that yes they were in his
genes that's just his way of being
social well if your way of being social
is never to interact with other people
or you know if your way of being social
can mean any actual Behavior
then again that is not a good
explanation it's a very bad explanation
okay so when people reference studies
done in certain animals I think rats is
common or monkeys they've done studies
where they deprived the monkey children
of their mother or of social contact the
same for the rats and the Rats that
don't get that social contact they die
very quickly but this is not analogous
for the reasons you've already stated to
humans you can't draw that analogy to
humans
it's not analogous to humans who are
creating ways of life for themselves
they're creating new ideas so we don't
know yet when creativity in that sense
sets in in babies it could it could be
that babies are analogous to newborn
babies or analogous to newborn monkeys
and that they perhaps wouldn't Thrive
without human contact right in fact
another possibility which I've sometimes
conjectured is that creativity
is in fact partly cultural
and that a newborn baby is kind of it
only has part of the creativity program
in the genes
and the rest is provided by memes from
culture now you know I have no evidence
for that but it's it's one of the many
possibilities that could be true
but explaining human choices
by analogy with rats or monkeys is just
ludicrous it is as I said it is is
defining a way
the defining feature of humans so if
anything or human nature would be that
capacity itself if we have to save that
concept yes yes uh yeah I don't know why
we want to save that concept but yes
there is a sense in which not having a
fixed nature is the fixed and immutable
nature of humans yeah exactly because it
wouldn't it wouldn't strictly be human
nature since the way you define a person
is that it can be instantiated on a
computer it just happens to be in in a
biological vehicle at this point which I
call you but but that's an interesting
conjecture about the baby not having the
creative program or the creative
capacity fully to begin with but I would
suppose it would have to learn those
memes uh fairly early to be able to
acquire language oh yes so by the time
babies are learning language they're
definitely creative because that's
that's a task that I mean we can't even
program our computer to this day to
match a baby's ability to learn language
so that that's definitely a a hugely
creative task yeah
but
I'm still hearing you say as you said in
the beginning there we still have the
capacity for for strong emotions like uh
negative emotions like fear and pain and
anxiety which served an evolutionary
purpose but then I'm thinking a very
current debate is about the idea of
gender differences uh and we have on the
one hand people like Jordan Peterson or
or Stephen Pinker
who argue fairly strongly that
biological differences between the Sexes
best explains the differences in
personality and behavior that we tend to
observe in men and women and on the
other hand we have the social
constructionists who claim that biology
is completely irrelevant in a social
contract social construct as well and
that reality is entirely created by the
social norms we have and so culture is
the only relevant factor I I think you
reject both of these conclusions based
on what you said but but you lean more
towards uh the latter that ideas are the
best explanation there but but I'm
curious then what role does the
difference in biology play here because
surely it has to have some if only in
creating different Sensations I find it
strange that most cultures uh have have
adopted the the same type of
stereotypical gender roles
yeah well how do you think about that
I think that that
both those theories are not only false
they have completely the wrong end of
the stick because
how much of human behavior is explained
by something or other is itself entirely
determined by human choices or I should
say how much of human choices
are explained by
genetics or culture or inborn creativity
all of those how much of human choices
are explained by those is itself
determined by human creativity how do
you mean can you explicate that well yes
so Keynes are just
a thing in our environment like like
snow for Inuits and like a particular
language for people living in in a
particular country now you might do a
study to say you know how much is
mathematical ability affected by
latitude
hmm
and you could make graphs and
correlations between uh the latitude at
which a person was born and then you'd
find a correlation and you would say aha
mathematical ability
is explained
by latitude
but that's not how I would use the word
explain
that just means correlated
the real explanation comes elsewhere now
you could also say
in regard to mathematical ability that
it was determined by
the number of the century in which you
were born
so in in Century 20 a certain proportion
of people become mathematicians in
Century zero it was Century one actually
that isn't a century zero
Century one it was far fewer in Century
uh minus a thousand it was essentially
is nil
and again why were there no
mathematicians well because of the harsh
life people led and because of the
culture that that made them not
interested but perhaps
perhaps there was a mathematician
somewhere how do we know perhaps there
was one in the year minus ten thousand
and ten thousand BC
we don't have any uh record of that
because they had no writing in that time
if there was one and I don't see why
there wouldn't have been one it was
because they managed to
violate
the Norms of their culture
and transcend the values or and and
preoccupations of their culture
and and develop an interest that we
would now identify as mathematics and
you know some people might say well
that's very unlikely for for a primitive
person to have done that but
today when we're allegedly all the
victims of the same genes
plenty of people violate the Norms of
their culture and the preoccupations of
their culture and so on and by the way
plenty of people violate their own
so-called survival Instinct not just for
the benefit of fit of the culture but
for all sorts of reasons including very
silly ones
yeah But but so how I I'm not sure I see
the connection to the fact that we see
the same gender roles throughout all
cultures or or the majority of cultures
in previous times and even now
um been because it seems to me if it was
purely a matter of ideas
and the genes didn't influence at all
why would we see that that pattern when
I mentioned correlations I I was trying
to say that that those are cases
where
most people's attitude to mathematics
was indeed
explained
by their environment by their genes by
their culture
and so on uh because the very few people
were using their creativity
and we don't have that many
creativity based cultures to go on
basically the West is it I mean you know
we have maybe ancient Athens or whatever
and the fact is that
there are enormous differences between
the roles of women in say ancient Athens
and present-day Sweden
and there are even differences between
present-day Sweden and present-day USA
and there are differences between
present-day Sweden and 50 years ago
Sweden
so come on
the mechanical explanations of gender
roles uh just fall flat on their faces
right and I mean you could also
perhaps argue that since if we go back
to prehistoric times again in the tribal
societies
it was just a a a fact of physiology
that
if you were going to hunt for food and
you couldn't just go to the grocery
store
the the people with the most muscle mass
who were faster and stronger could just
naturally you know it's not that it's in
their genes it's just it's the natural
interpretation or the natural idea to
create yeah yes absolutely that that is
actually I wouldn't call those gender
roles because uh that is just a
practical consideration just like the
person with a broken leg also wouldn't
have gone on a hunt exactly and on on
the contrary a woman who was uh was
unusually strong or was unusually good
at throwing Spears would have gone on a
hunt what we call gender roles is
enforced gender roles
either culturally or legally or you know
by by ridicule or whatever and they are
they are irrational
um but differences in Behavior
that have a practical purpose that the
person benefits from or identifies with
are in a different category from gender
roles in the other sense yeah no
definitely so I I hadn't planned on
asking you about this but it seems to be
related and uh it's so interesting so
just to try to push back a little bit
when it comes to things like
twin studies then not specifically about
gender roles but about genes causing
Behavior now I haven't looked into the
twin studies myself carefully but
the claims seem to be that they've done
studies where and supposedly a lot of
them where people is it called identical
twins
yes yes yeah I don't know the different
types but the the the most identical one
where they separate them at Birth and
they get completely different
environments to grow up in and then when
they're adults they seem to share things
that seem unlikely to
uh just be coincidence things like
sexual preferences or or political
leanings or musical taste
um so how would one explain that then
because it seems
uh
too haphazard to just say that they they
just happen to develop the same interest
in music for for instance so I take it
that none of these twin studies
are double-blind studies that is none of
them have these twins wrapped up in an
opaque container
unable to communicate other than by
typing in and out
so that in fact these identical twins
who are placed in allegedly different
environments
they are seen and their behaviors are
noted by
people
by people who are genetically culturally
subculturally and so on inclined to
interpret behaviors in in a particular
way so if um
if someone's very good looking
they might uh have a different
experience of high school from someone
who is less good looking and those
different experiences in high school
might affect their interests their their
sexual preferences you know you name it
it might influence it
and even if they then go to to different
schools
the fact that they are equally good
looking
will have the same bias biased effect on
them which people in the study will
later pick up and say oh this is coded
for by genes but it's not coded for by
genes any more than the country you live
in is coded for by genes even though
that too has a strong genetic
correlation
right I think okay so it's similar I
think you write a similar example in the
beginning of infinity your book your
second book where yeah being attractive
you're talking in the context of
Happiness research which does a similar
thing here 50 of happiness is encoded in
genes and is immutable and so maybe
people just treat Attractive people
better and so that is what causes you to
be more happy and you you share those
genes but it's not the genes yeah I
doubt it's I doubt it's as simple as
that
um Because treatment of somebody which
is intended to cause a certain effect
rarely does but it might cause a
coherent effect even if a different one
from the intended one
so yeah it that that it would be very
surprising
if identical twins reared separately did
not have a lot of traits in common
even if there was no genetic coding of
those and as I said before the the whole
concept of genetic coding is a mistake
because how much of the genetic coding
gets translated into actual behavior and
personality is itself determined by
creativity
a person can decide not to behave as
their G as their genes are telling them
like the people who who take up ascetic
Lifestyles and deprive themselves of
this or that food which they really
enjoy
because they have adopted an idea either
they invented it or they adopted it from
someone else that this is better than
what the genes are telling them
right so okay so we I mean uh
we have genes we have starting ideas as
it were and then
we we quickly start using our creativity
to improve upon that so we're yeah it is
a starting point and that but that's all
it is
yes so this is Stephen Pinker has this
idea that his opponents believe in a
blank slate at both yeah and that that's
that's uh I think that metaphor comes
more or less from from Locke so I I
would say we have a slate we're born
with a slate that's that's got tons of
stuff on it some useful some not useful
some nonsense and so on but it's a slate
it has chalk on it it can be wiped off
easily
and it is very common for people to act
in ways where for any animal that would
be the one of the deepest things in
their genetic makeup like like um eating
uh having sex avoiding pain all these
things are commonly
overwritten by humans for the most
trivial of reasons
yeah exactly I choose to fast uh
intermittent fast every day because it's
in fashion to do so and I get more likes
on Instagram yeah yeah yeah yeah
but um no I think I think the the word
people would have trouble with there is
easily that we can easily change the
Slate but uh I I would agree on uh with
you on that well so let me say commonly
and that is already enough to refute the
the the theory I mean it is common for
teenage girls to become anorexic you
know it it it's it's common for people
to go on diets
or to to binge eat or both and and all
those things are supposedly explained by
genes
well you know bad explanation again
all right folks time for the fun stuff
so if you really enjoy what I'm doing
here there is a way to support the
podcast you can go over to copefi.com to
explain that is
ko.fi.com do explain and you can make a
one-time donation or even a monthly
donation if that's the kind of person
you feel like being this year
maybe you should ask yourself what would
Jesus do and then surely Jesus would
donate to do explain
another way you can help me out is to go
over to iTunes and write me a five-star
review that would also be very helpful
all right thank you very much let's get
back to enjoying the show
all right man so I want to switch gears
a little bit and uh go over to the
philosophy of mind and you you argue
that the brain must be a computer and
you make use of the functionalist
distinction between brain and mind
hardware and software respectively and a
lot of people would uh take issue with
that for instance I remember there was
an aeon article called The Empty brain
circulating a while back the summary of
the Arctic article was your brain does
not process information retrieve
knowledge or store memories in short
your brain is not a computer
now I'm convinced after reading that but
it went on to say uh that speaking of
the brain as a computer is no more true
than how we've historically described it
as consisting of hydraulic pumps Wheel
Works powered by Springs and gears being
a telegraph it's just a convenient
metaphor that continually changes with
our current technology and that the
computer metaphor will meet the same
fate as the others soon enough
but
I mean clearly a laptop and a brain are
different at one level our brain doesn't
have the Von Neumann architecture and
it's made up of neurons and blood
vessels rather than metal and silicone
and it's constantly rewiring itself the
neuroplasticity but
but I take your claim to be much more
fundamental than than that so how do we
know first of all that the brain is
computer and then also why is it crucial
to make this Hardware software
distinction between the brain and the
mind and not just talk in terms of the
brain
okay well
um you you ran through a lot of ideas
there
I'm not sure I can remember them all but
but the basic thing is that first of all
the basic thing is that the brain is a
physical object and obeys the laws of
physics
now some people would deny that some
people would say that the brain is in
part a supernatural object
controlled by a supernatural entity the
soul
which doesn't obey laws of physics okay
that is a different argument from
everything else you said and
um I mean if you want me to go into why
I think that's a bad idea I I guess I
could but but I think it's more
important
to
address the points that take for granted
that the brain is a physical object and
the question is what kind of a physical
object is it like a steam engine is it
like a computer
um is it like a blank slate uh you know
whatever and it's rather sad that uh
it's getting on for a century now that
uh Alan Turing solved this entire
problem
or if you'd like it it might have been
solved even earlier in the in the 1820s
by by Babbage and lovelies
or perhaps Lovelace and Babbage
um not sure nowadays I think it may have
may well have been lovelies who had the
the idea of computational universality
as I Now understand it
rather than Babbage but anyway Turing
certainly did have it
and he understood that if the brain
obeys laws of physics
then
no matter what kind of Soul or whatever
or what kind of juices may be powering
it its functionality is information
processing
that is nerve impulses or chemical uh
impulses in and nerve impulses and
chemical impulses out which which then
cause our
actions and our speech and they also
cause our memory and therefore our
introspection and our explanations of
why we do what we do and of what we are
this is all the processing of
information now nowadays we take like
since Turing really we we have taken
information processing to be the same
thing as computation
but that's only the case if computation
is indeed Universal as as Turing
conjectured
and why is that you mean because then if
if compute if computation is universal
that means that there is only one kind
of information the kind that can be
processed by a turing machine
that there isn't another kind that could
be processed by a different kind of
machine which the brain might be
there there cannot be such a thing if
universality is true
right okay yeah
and uh Turing conjectured that
he also argued for it quite powerfully
um
but if quantum theory is true
then we can do better than that we
because I actually proved that physical
systems the debate quantum theory
support Universal computation so the
universal computer not quite turings but
what we call quantum computer nowadays
is a universal computer and can perform
any computation that any other physical
object can perform including a brain
so when we say that a brain is a
computer
we are saying an amalgam of two things
we're saying that a brain is an
information processor all the funk
functions of the brain are information
processing functions just because it is
a physical object
that's one thing and then we're saying
it's a computer because actually there
is only one kind of general information
processing device and uh and it has the
same they all have the same repertoire
and that's why we say the brain is a
computer this isn't an analogy this is
just a way of saying some substantive
things that we know basically from
physics
right so could you say that the the the
information processing that process of
input processing and output is analogous
to initial States uh loss of motion and
and and uh well final State final State
yeah
kind of although it's it's rather
awkwardly phrased in that sense because
human thought doesn't necessarily have
an output in the sense of
limb movements and statements made by
the mouth
some of the output just stays in the
brain
and but it's subject to the same laws we
can think things that we never tell
anybody
like you know I I might be thinking
something of you now and I'll never tell
anybody what it is
uh but nevertheless by the same argument
that I made earlier
that thinking was a computation in in
that it processed information it had an
input it had an output even though the
output will you know will never pass my
lips
therefore the input output model
of computation is a bit awkward when
applied to the brain
but from the point of view of whether a
brain is a computer that doesn't matter
yeah because if there wasn't such a
thing as universal computation then
different system might process
information in different uh ways and
then we couldn't talk about
everything uh using computation
everything being a computer that's right
and so if physics were different if the
universe were different that way then
then animals and people could could have
been built differently there could have
been two kinds of information that are
not interoperable
and two kinds of computation or maybe
ten kinds and you know but but that's
not how our world is made
wow okay now I get it that's fascinating
so but
um okay if we go back to the distinction
then between uh brain and mind why is
that necessary
yes ah well that's necessary to
understand certain things not others but
the point about information the reason
why
it even made sense to Guess that that
there might be
Universal computation is that the
properties of information are
independent of the substrate
that it is instantiated in
so lots of different kinds of physical
object can store the same information a
DNA strand can store a Mozart Symphony
and people have done things like this
and and of course computer memories
store our words and our ideas in a
completely different form from the way
that
our brainstorms them and we take for
granted that you can make Hardware like
microphones and and
um loudspeakers and so on which
Translate
from one way of storing to another
so the information in the brain that is
the mind and and other
information in the brain is the
substrate independent part
and in fact when we use it even you know
even without technology
we are constantly
changing
information from one form into another
Even in our cells information in DNA
gets transcribed to RNA when then it
gets transcribed to proteins and we can
we can see that the even though these
are different types of physical object
the information is the same and the the
functionality of let's say uh protein
synthesis
depends on how good the system is at
preserving
the information for as it is transferred
from one form into another and also at
at interpreting it seeing what is the
meaning of the information in a given
context
so when it comes to the brain
the brain has contains information
in memory and in
neuron firings and quite likely also in
states of various chemical
concentrations and so on and those are
independent of the
substrate in the in the you know you you
can be given an injection of of
something that that makes it related and
then then you can say hey I'm elated and
you've suddenly you've suddenly
translated that information from
chemical form into the form of sound
waves
whereas the hardware the only thing
that's important about the hardware is
that it's capable of
Universal computation
so the the hardware is constant in in a
particular brain although in the future
we we will be able to make information
processing devices that are functionally
the same as the brain but uh are built
of different things just like billions
of years ago Evolution had the idea of
of using DNA as its information storage
device instead of RNA
right I I just in case I'm misunderstood
here I I don't mean anything
anthropomorphic by this
so the important part here is that the
mind is the the
Universal information processor so to
speak that runs on the brand the program
um yes it's it's a program that's right
it's uh well no uh I see myself I would
say the mind is yeah the the brain is
the universal processor
and and the the mind is a program
running on it which is universal in a
different sense it is capable of
supporting any kind of explanation
right and that that's interesting
because I ended up in an argument with
one of my teachers the other day my
classmate and I had held a presentation
on on uh how do we know it was an
explanation of knowledge and and why
people should care about it and uh
afterwards we were discussing this and I
brought up the universality of human
minds and
even if you agree that computation is
universal
how do we know that Minds that our minds
are Universal
ah that isn't indeed a different
argument yeah because he wouldn't buy
that yeah well explanatory universality
is uh well I Do cover this in the
beginning of Infinity uh as well but I I
cover it separately from the issue of
computation and computational
universality
uh in in short the reason why I think it
doesn't make sense to deny
that we are capable of
explanatory universality is that the
theory that we aren't capable of it is
how can I put it it's functionally the
same as a belief in the Supernatural
because it is a belief that there is
some
aspect of the world whose explanation is
not even in principle accessible to
human Minds
that for example it might be accessible
to to superhuman Minds uh Gods or or
aliens or or dolphins or something and
that they might understand it or perhaps
no one can understand it perhaps it's
just inexplicable well if we have an
inexplicable world or a world that we
can't understand that is affecting us
logically you can't disprove that it's
it's also not disproved by the
universality of computation or anything
like that but
it is the very archetype of a bad
explanation Because by the same token
that the world might be inexplicable
the explanation might be anything so uh
there might be inexplicable Gods out
there
there there might be inexplicable laws
of nature which are just toying with us
or perhaps the laws of nature will come
to an end next year
and different laws of nature will come
and torture us or else put us into
Nirvana and
all these different possibilities are
just you know
small subsets of of their overarching
idea that we are in in a in a bubble of
explicability but the the universe as a
whole is not explicable
all those things I've just mentioned fit
into that
yeah yeah and it's also non-parsimonious
you're adding an extra assumption there
that is unexplained
uh that is true yes
so so okay so is there because there's a
lot of emphasis today on or at least it
has been I I still think it is but an
emphasis on neuroscience and the how
essential it is to understanding the
mind and Ai and all these things but it
is there anything important to be
learned about our minds by studying the
architecture of the brain directly for
instance what a function seems to be
specific for certain hemispheres or that
the default mode network is central for
self-reference and daydreaming and so on
or or are we going about that all wrong
of course Neuroscience is is very
important if if something goes wrong
with your brain you you want Medical
Science to know as much as possible
about it but but you asked whether it
was it was relevant basically to our
idea our minds yeah okay yeah I
understand our minds yeah
um uh and I think only in a very
Marginal Way
uh so I I said that we we are we are
born
known as blank slates but as as slates
covered with
um information yeah
I can envisage circumstances under which
it might be useful to know what that is
so that uh for example if there if there
is a
piece of inborn propensity
which humans
typically abandon
let's say
you know during during the first 10
years of their life they they typically
abandon it or perhaps they always
abandon that's that's an easier case
yeah it suppose that they always abandon
it then if you tell somebody when
they're nine years old you show them
some Neuroscience that says that that
um all this struggle that they're having
is just to erase uh the part of their
genetic inheritance and it doesn't
actually make sense then they might say
oh I I always thought it didn't make
sense but it's you know it I'm just
working my way through that and it might
be helpful to such a person
maybe it wouldn't be helpful maybe maybe
uh you know it's something that you have
to work out for yourself I I don't know
I'm trying to explain why I think such
knowledge is
bound to be marginal at best
um
that is knowledge of our
inborn
theories that our inborn uh wants and
and values and criteria and expectations
and so on Yeah so basically if I've
understood you correctly here you're
saying that since the the brain is a
universal computer but since it
instantiates a universal program I can
create explanatory knowledge uh which in
turn obeys its own it's it's independent
of its physical instantiation once you
have that program so then the brain as
you said right now it it gives us a
starting point of of the chalkboard with
some scribbles on it but we can always
erase all of that so it's it's not yes
primary to our understanding in any
sense yes and and I guess
not important either not very important
or or not at all important you're going
to get a lot of slack for that David
well the the people who who give me a
hard time for this I I can't blame them
right it's it's written in their genes
that's great
that's true so um yes okay so that was
the distinction between uh the mind and
the Brain but there's another
distinction here then between the
unconscious and the conscious mind
and are you aware of the social
psychologist Jonathan height
no afraid not
okay he he uh he has a analogy a rider
on the elephant analogy where he says
the rational side is like the rider on
the elephant and the emotional side is
the elephant the elephant uh or sorry
the rider looks in charge but when
there's a disagreement between these two
sides the elephant usually wins
and so this is a similar version to
Daniel kahneman's system one and two
system one being fast emotional system
two slower more logical
how do you currently think about the
connection between the unconscious and
the conscious mind I guess this I had a
question here are we essentially ruled
by or unconscious so to speak I suppose
we've touched on some of this already
but yes I don't think that the uh
distinction between the conscious and
unconscious mind is a matter of Hardware
first of all I don't think there's a
unconscious thought module and a
conscious module and and uh sort of lots
of neurons connecting them and sometimes
those connections crackle and get hot
and and then one side wins I don't think
it's like that I think conscious and
unconscious is just
a rough way of describing uh the fact
that the content of different ideas
is sometimes structurally different is
often structurally different
it's like um I don't know if I can think
of a good analogy but but
um uh if you go on a Motorway and you
see police cars and normal cars you you
may you you may form a theory that
police cars obey one law of motion and
ordinary cars obey another law of motion
and and you'd be wrong to think that
police cars and ordinary cars are made
in different factories or operate by
different principles
or are fundamentally different in any
way what makes them different is just
software it's you know you the
difference between a policeman and and a
non-policeman is just software and it's
the same with the police car and the
non-police car so it's not that there
are
strictly speaking
unconscious ideas and conscious ideas
and they have to interact with each
other that that's just a way of
summarizing the fact that some processes
are aware of other processes but not
aware of a third kind of process and so
on it's a matter of what's aware or
aware of what and I certainly don't
think that there is any kind of rule
enforced by the brain or or whatever
that one kind of idea always wins over
another kind I I surely it's a matter of
everyday experience that
people often do things
that they have a strong
desire not to do
and on the contrary that people also
often do things that they have a strong
desire to do but consciously think is
wrong
and and in in that sense don't want to
do it another thing that's slightly
wrong with that pit the whole picture is
that
it assumes that the conscious mind by
itself
is consistent
and therefore can be said to have a
desire and a preference like like the
rider on an elephant
but what if the rider on the elephant is
in two minds or in a hundred Minds
that's more like it the mind is full of
ideas which are full of various kinds of
conflict with each other
so you couldn't therefore have a rule
that says one kind of idea always wins
over the other by the way if there was
such a rule then if papyrian
epistemology is true uh this thing
wouldn't be Universal that that'd be it
would be unable to understand certain
things specifically the things which
the part of the mind that is supposedly
dominant
is wrong about
but uh uh again everyday life it's full
of examples of people uh not doing what
their emotions say or not doing what
their reason says and having conflicting
emotions and having conflicting ideas
you know it all happens all the time
right you mean if if there was a rule
there uh instantiated essay it would
basically be justificationism or
foundationalism you would have yes yeah
it wouldn't all be conjectural which it
seems to be yeah yes okay but so on this
view then if because I often hear
studies reference like oh the smell of
garbage makes people Express more
socially conservative views or if you're
you get a person to hold something warm
or cold if it will influence how they
judge a person they're talking to as
warm or cold but
that's not a matter of unconscious ideas
overriding or the the emotional no the
elephant overriding the writer it's me
it's just creating Sensations that you
then conjecture ideas around and they
just happen to be yes and they they
might be they might be uh like you said
about the archaic people the men more
likely to go hunting or whatever in a
particular culture it might be the case
that
smelling garbage makes makes you more
likely to dwell on one kind of idea and
not another
um yeah
these studies
even if they were
done in every culture there are false
ideas in every culture and and their
their ideas which like you know slavery
which was once considered normal in
every culture and now is considered
abnormal in every cult in almost every
culture
so it's not surprising that there are
correlations between
unrelated things uh it would be very
surprising if there weren't it would
mean that that our ideas are in some
high level sense
randomized in every way except ways that
we know of
so it's not surprising but I I don't
think this explains anything useful
about how minds work or how people make
decisions
and by the way these ideas always I
think always but perhaps it's only
almost always
the conclusion is always the same
humans aren't what they CR they're
cracked up to be humans aren't uh what
they pretend to be they aren't what they
want to be instead they're just
mechanical they're machines they need to
be
controlled put down you know and so on
it's funny that the conclusion is always
the same
and yeah I don't know why why we're so
self-deprecating yeah in that regard and
as humans it's weird to want to look at
humans that way
yeah I mean we're very we're very upset
if you just choose one group of people
yeah uh and claim they are bad yeah
that's a No-No but if you include all of
humanity which is I guess as racist as
you can become yeah
um yeah I don't know why that's all
right yeah but so okay so this is yeah
this is an um interesting point here so
I want to hone in on that a little bit
because yeah speaking about humans as
rational or at least having we're not as
rational as we like to believe as you
said one way well-known way of framing
such irrational Tendencies quote unquote
in humans is in terms of cognitive
biases
which I believe was popularized by
Kahneman and twersky and it basically
it's presented as systematic errors in
thinking ways we tend to fail in our
reasoning in particular situations and
one explanation that one often hears is
that these biases are side effects of
evolved mental shortcuts heuristics that
has been very useful and effective in
the past for making decisions because we
don't want to waste we don't have time
to waste too many mental resources but
these shortcuts can end up misfiring as
it were and as a result our capacity for
rational thinking is limited by these
biases yes
um and perhaps in a fundamental way from
this perspective so I I don't think that
biases in that sense exist that what
exists are errors and people people make
errors and sometimes people make the
same error again and again and that's
because there's an error there's an
error somewhere in in either in their
thinking or in their ideas or in their
fixed ideas sometimes different people
make the same error and that might be
due to culture or it might be due to
just the logic of the situation that the
certain errors are easy to make and the
truth is hard to come by
and and so on so that's that's biases in
general that that's why I I don't think
anything is explained by biases that
isn't just a natural consequence of the
fact that humans are absolutely
jam-packed with errors of every kind
So when you say errors you mean we just
have the wrong ideas about something yes
yes false theories it could be our slate
that we start with and then we just
never uh conjecture a better idea or
yeah my guess is that the Slate gets
completely overwritten quite fast but
but you know it might be it could be
that there are bits of the Slate that
that in a certain culture or in maybe in
all existing cultures tend to survive
and then form an error that almost
everybody makes uh but as when that was
pointed out it would if that was pointed
out by somebody then it would no longer
be the error that everybody makes but
there's a worst thing once you
go beyond the idea of just biases which
I say they're just errors so as long as
you know that
they can be erased and argued against
then it's it's not so bad to to think of
them as somehow different from other
errors though they aren't
but if you think that they are inborn
and have to be overcome then you're in
there's a much more dangerous territory
there because
inborn biases can only possibly be
finite in number
and therefore there is an implicit
project here to overcome let's say there
are 23 of them yeah um the the project
is to identify these one by one very
clever people have to identify them by
by somehow getting around them and then
seeing them for what they are and
analyzing them with Bayesian statistics
and and and then telling everybody else
and everybody else has has to introspect
and find those errors and get into the
habit and practice of not having those
errors and once you have
once you have found five or six of these
error of these 23 errors
you are a better person
and that means that there are two kinds
of people in the world the ones who have
overcome their biases and ones who have
not yet overcome their biases and those
are the the best and the rest and that
that kind of way of thinking about
people is terrible it's uh first of all
it's false for the reasons that I've
given but it's also dangerous it's
authoritarian
it contradicts
all the not all it contradicts some of
the best traditions of
Western rational Society
it uh sort of tends towards
justifying government by these best
people or that government should consult
these best people or that government
should test to see how many biases you
have to and and you only get the vote if
you have fewer than a certain number of
biases and heaven forbid that somebody
decides that they have eliminated all 23
they will then become a psychopath yeah
well yeah I mean that's interesting I've
never thought of it in moral terms
that's an interesting argument
yeah so I remember listening to Daniel
kahnemann on Sam Harris's podcast and he
asked kanamana and by the end okay so
you've worked in this field almost the
entirety of your life and with these
biases and so have that helped you at
all in your thinking and he he laughed
and just said that no I'm just as biased
as anyone else like there there's no way
to get around it pretty much what's the
implication there okay so he is he has
resisted that conclusion yeah yeah
exactly did he give a reason for did he
give a rationale for resisting it I mean
he he seems to think that some of them
because this is an argument they all
um often make that even if you're aware
of certain biases it doesn't seem like
people still seem to do the same mistake
they tell you about the bias and then
they test you and you do the same thing
in a week or two but I've always thought
if you follow your argument here it's
just errors it might just mean that we
haven't actually found what the error is
and so we haven't yes it is we're going
about it the wrong way right exactly
yeah that's what it must be yeah yeah no
that's that's fascinating so David uh I
appreciate your time I thought I might
just uh ask you quickly as the last
question here I've heard rumors that you
got to meet Carl popper uh once in your
life I just want to know how that was
like for you yes uh it was amazing I
went there with Bryce DeWitt oh and and
seeing those two P you know just being a
fly on the wall when those people were
having conversation was was an
exceptional honor I can imagine and uh
uh it was a very fun conversation he was
very popular and as I tweeted recently I
I kept feeling it get you know I kept
sort of mentally slapping myself down
because I kept thinking wait a minute
how come this old guy knows so much for
period philosophy and how come he's so
how come he express it so clearly and
yeah is it you know somehow cognitive
dissonance or something you know it's
not often
that one meets people with those
attributes and especially an old
philosopher you know I would expect an
old philosopher to have the opposite of
those attributes yeah I hope I'm not
being too rude here but no absolutely so
it was amazing and Bryce DeWitt also was
amazing during that I mean he always was
amazing as well but as we were leaving
do it asked Papa what do you think is
the most important problem in physics
and Papa said
the problem of why all electrons have
the same mass
and DeWitt said and this is a really
brilliant answer that's interesting that
that perhaps shows the difference
between a physicist and a philosopher
because for me it's like this
if
some electrons had different masses from
others
I would assume that there must be some
kind of field that accounts for the
different Mass
and I would expect there to be that that
I would expect that field to have
equations of motion and to obey a
quantum theory and I would want to find
out what that was and so them all having
the same mass is a non-problem for me
so I I thought it was a very nice answer
yeah that is and not to I mean it's not
a Perfect Analogy because obviously
you're still a very young man David but
I uh I mean I have the same feeling
speaking to you how can you know
everything about Deutsche philosophy it
doesn't make any sense
but I I very much appreciate your time
David and this has been a lot of fun for
me and um fun for me too oh I'm glad to
hear that have a great night until next
time okay thank you
[Music]
thank you